---
title: "The Chainging Times"
pubDate: "Mar 17 2026"
description: ""
---


	Ok hi everyone. Very short presentation. 
I have been quiet for a few weeks. Been in contemplation. A lot has been changing in our reality, and it is hard to get a real track on what exactly is going on, and what it means.
Which comes to the basis of what I want to say here. You may recall a few months ago, maybe August, I mentioned that the energy of this reality had shifted. It was moving to a more dark place. I was attacked of course, because everything in most people’s world’s was exactly the same. But I knew this specific thing was coming and I had sensed something in the energy was indicating it was very close. But there was another area I was seeing. The internet. The energy of this has been changing so rapidly. I found this out in a few instances, some very strange ways, over the last couple of months. Just track how much of your screen time has a video playing on it. Now think back 10 or 15 years ago. How much of your screen time then had any sort of video playing. That change has been drastic, youtube has gone from a place to watch some old music or tv shows, to the place the average person first turns for any information, from how to bake a cake to what happened in the world.
The current internet is not what is was 10 years ago, 5 years ago, perhaps even a year ago. It almost seems sometime last summer or fall, a switch was flicked, and the entire energy structure of this thing known as the internet changed. But so is reality in many cases.
I wanted to share a short pointer to how fast things are changing in our current time. And I don’t just mean what is going on in the Middle East, which is not exactly what it seems. I don’t mean that in the way some people try to say all of this is some sort of CGI Hollywood presentation. These are all people who have no contact with people in the region, and make up their ideas while sitting at home staring at a screen. No, there is lots of destruction in the region, and it is going to get far more worse in the coming weeks, likely months, and possibly years. And that will be felt globally. But the real focus is not so much to know WHAT is going on, but WHY it is going on. And it has little to do with resources, oil, trade, alliances or anything else. Until you understand Messianic religion, and the conditions required for the return of various saviours, only then will you begin to understand what is really going on there and make decent predictions as to what is likely to happen next. 
Since the energy behind the scenes is changing, everyone has to align ourselves in new ways to navigate the reality the way it is now, not the way it was last year or ten years ago. The so called information age might be over. There is more than enough information out there for anyone who is curious about just about anything. More information is not going to lead to inner clarity. I think something very different is called for, but I am not sure what that is yet.
Now is the time to get yourself out of 2025 and all the years before thinking, and begin looking to how things are in 2026, and are going to be. I don’t have answers yet, but I am taking time to be still and feel out what changed, and what that means for how I should be operating in this new, lets call it, world climate. 
In some ways it feels like when you move to a new country. You learn quick that everyone and everything is not the same as it was where you are from. Many things are done differently, new social norms, new expectations and there is no handbook that comes, you have to figure some of this stuff out for yourself. You have to be aware, watch other people and what is going on, and begin to see how you stay as an individual, while at the same time moving in a way that reduces friction in the new place. That is kind of what it seems like now, learning how to move in a new, slightly different, energetic reality.
Back to finishing my book. I am working really hard on it, and want to have it as clear as I can make it, so not rushing the end result because I want to the book to clearly speak for itself. It gets completed when it gets completed, but it is coming along.
Act with clarity, and sense for yourself how different things may be now. We are not even three months into the year, and already it feels like a decade. So I go back to my book, and back to contemplating this shifting and changing reality, and seeing what shifts and changes do I have to make to stay rooted and clear within it. Some things I do will stay the same and some will have to change.
Cheers





