---
title: "It has been quite a week"
pubDate: "May 21 2026"

---
It Has Been Quite a Week
So I tried making a video on Friday, and I got through about one minute of it, and had to stop. I couldn't keep looking at a screen and talking. It is one thing when having a conversation on a screen with another person, even though that is starting to feel strange, but here where I was talking to no one but the screen is feeling completely un-natural and foreign.
It is all part of the last couple of weeks where many things are beginning to change. A type of reaction to the spiralling changes in this reality. The end of writing my new book has given me some time to think of a few things.
One of the first is to see the total theater quality of our reality. What I mean by that is not just that it is a fabrication, a type of projection. But it is more just how many layers of theater have been purposely placed into it, to act as another layer of distraction and manipulation. Just about everything we call society and civilization, everything that we do now has been manipulated, is all a theater play, placed into the base projection. I no longer call the so-called leaders of this reality controllers, they are manipulators and manufacturers. They are manufacturing stories. Everything you think of as society, even language itself, it a type of manipulation and confusion to take us away from the base original projection and get caught in a million other small nets. And it is getting deeper and deeper, the types of manipulative levels are getting more.
Here this week I have had a lot to do on the farm. I had to remake fencing to keep the lambs out of the garden, I had to move a lot of dirt for the making of raised beds, I had to do this and that. And in the midst of it I realized, I just finished writing a book about the life of the hunter-gatherer, and if I was living that life, I would be doing none of what I had been doing. There would be no fences to repair, no dirt to move. None of it. I might have had to go hunt something that morning or the day before, gather a bit more wood, repair a spear or bow and arrow...but what else would I have to do? Well, nothing. It was like I was seeing the book I just wrote revealing itself in my day to day energetic use. 
This overlayed theater, or really theaters on top of theaters, are all designed just to get our attention and our energy focused on it. Everything we call civilization as a mass deception. Every single part of it has to be seen through. And that includes all of the subconscious layering that we have taken in and believed. The plays are really about implanting ideas of "how things should be," that we then unconsciously just follow along with creating in our life without even noticing we are. That is what we have to unravel. And that is what I am going to be doing over the next few months.
Where do you go to get useful trustworthy information anymore? While writing my book I stayed away from all the interviews, podcasts, news discussions. But now this week I took a look at them again. And the amazing thing was that almost all of them were lying, or misdirecting. Very few are speaking honestly. That has been my goal. Not to be correct, but no one is 100% correct, but you try to be honest with what you present. After looking over all this mass of information, most of it has a deceptive quality to it.

The so-called experts on anything are really experts on nothing. Two examples. I went back to listen to some geo-political "experts." And they were either lying or ignorant of how these systems work. Maybe a bit of both. It as shocking. Then I was reading a commentary on an ancient Taoist text. The ancient text itself was fantastic to find, but the expert commentary was absolute garbage. The so-called expert had no idea what she had been reading, yet wrote an entire book about it that would only distort any reader away from the real meaning that the text was pointing towards. So where do you go? I began to see how many experts in my life I trusted blindly because they wrote a book or gave a lecture or whatnot. I have a questioning attitude, but I took in way too much. Even teachers in high school for example. They are not experts, far from it. Yet we believed a lot of what they told us unquestioningly. I see again just how much has to be rooted out that might have gotten into our subconscious belief structures.
I can still trust what I learned from Mr Park or Bruce or Dr Li, because I met them. I spent timer with them, ate dinner with them. I got to know them as people as well as someone with knowledge. The books I read only would up having value because of the time with them. I could take the book, then compare it with the real world role model, and see if they matched up. Almost always, especially the shaman books out there, were nothing like what was going on at the ceremonies with Bruce, Clayton or Dennis. So it was obvious who to trust, the ones on the reserve doing things like they had for several hundred years, compared to the unknown writer who might be just making everything up. It was those meetings were the value and understanding came. Again the problem of a screen. The screen only shows what the other side of the screen wanted shown. 
My personal opinion is that in the next few years, information from a screen is going to be less valued compared to time spent between people within the reality. I think the people who made it to the intensives the last few years, got more out of those few days then listening to a whole year of me talking in videos. Something tells me this is what people are going to realize they want, and perhaps need going forward.
I also took a look into a few areas as well and wondered if I should do a few interviews for my new book. But as I looked around I got the sense that the whole podcast-interview dynamic is dying. The channels are getting few numbers, and there is little new or interesting. And I think people are just full now anyway, they have saturated with information. People are dealing with so much insanity in the world, they don't have the time and energy to spend 2 hours listening to some podcast rambling interview anymore. I actually think the podcast period is over, that it is dying. One or two are still getting big followings, but they are very rare now, and they might drop off in the next year as well. It was valuable while it lasted, but my guess is that AI is going to take over all of that, and the machine itself is soon going to become the source of all information.
So I am doing a bit of turn around. I want to not write for a while, go inward, and look into some areas I haven't looked at for a while. Stop looking at what the crazy reality is doing, but the inner reaction that is going on to the crazy reality. 
I will make a point later on about language, and how all the languages we use have been created for manipulation before communication, and thus every time you talk to someone you have to deconstruct the language being used, before you can even see if honest communication is taking place. But that is for another time, I have "written" enough here for one day.
